+++
title = "SimBu: Bias-aware simulation of bulk RNA-seq data with variable cell type composition"
date = 2022-05-06
authors = ["alexander_dietrich", "gregor_sturm", "Lorenzo Merotto", "Federico Marini", "Francesca Finotello", "markus_list"]
#type:
#    0 = Uncategorized
#    1 = Conference paper
#    2 = Journal article
#    3 = Preprint / Working Paper
#    4 = Report
#    5 = Book
#    6 = Book section
#    7 = Thesis (v4.2+ required)
#    8 = Patent (v4.2+ required)
publication_types = ["3"]
publication = "*bioRxiv*"

# Abstract and optional shortened version.
abstract = "As complex tissues are typically composed of various cell types, deconvolution tools have been developed to computationally infer their cellular composition from bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data. To comprehensively assess deconvolution performance, gold-standard datasets are indispensable. Gold-standard, experimental techniques like flow cytometry or immunohistochemistry are resource-intensive and cannot be systematically applied to the numerous cell types and tissues profiled with high-throughput transcriptomics. The simulation of ‘pseudo-bulk’ data, generated by aggregating single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) expression profiles in pre-defined proportions, offers a scalable and cost-effective alternative. This makes it feasible to create in silico gold standards that allow fine-grained control of cell-type fractions not conceivable in an experimental setup. However, at present, no simulation software for generating pseudo-bulk RNA-seq data exists.\nWe developed SimBu, an R package capable of simulating pseudo-bulk samples based on various simulation scenarios, designed to test specific features of deconvolution methods. A unique feature of SimBu is the modelling of cell-type-specific mRNA bias using experimentally-derived or data-driven scaling factors. Here, we show that SimBu can generate realistic pseudo-bulk data, recapitulating the biological and statistical features of real RNA-seq data. Finally, we illustrate the impact of mRNA bias on the evaluation of deconvolution tools and provide recommendations for the selection of suitable methods for estimating mRNA content.\nSimBu is a user-friendly and flexible tool for simulating realistic pseudo-bulk RNA-seq datasets serving as in silico gold-standard for assessing cell-type deconvolution methods. SimBu is freely available at https://github.com/omnideconv/SimBu as an R package under the GPL-3 license."

# Featured image thumbnail (optional)
image_preview = ""

# Is this a selected publication? (true/false)
selected = false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this publication with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `projects = ["deep-learning"]` references `content/project/deep-learning.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.
projects = []

# Tags (optional).
#   Set `tags = []` for no tags, or use the form `tags = ["A Tag", "Another Tag"]` for one or more tags.
tags = ["bulk RNA-seq","cell-type deconvolution","simulation"]

# Links (optional).
url_pdf = "https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.05.06.490889v1.full.pdf"
url_preprint = "https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.05.06.490889v1"
url_code = "https://github.com/omnideconv/SimBu"
url_dataset = ""
url_project = "https://github.com/omnideconv"
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""
url_poster = ""
url_source = ""
doi = "10.1101/2022.05.06.490889"

# Custom links (optional).
#   Uncomment line below to enable. For multiple links, use the form `[{...}, {...}, {...}]`.
# url_custom = [{name = "Custom Link", url = "http://example.org"}]

# Does this page contain LaTeX math? (true/false)
math = false

# Does this page require source code highlighting? (true/false)
highlight = true

+++
